Change tracking in Java (#712)
cap-js/docs: java/change-tracking.md

See [Reference the New CDS Model in an Existing CAP Java Project](./plugins#reference-the-new-cds-model-in-an-existing-cap-java-project).

For the UI part, you also need to enable the feature described 
here [On-the-fly Localization of EDMX](https://cap.cloud.sap/docs/releases/dec23#on-the-fly-localization-of-edmx).

### Annotating entities

To capture changes, you need to extend your entities with a technical aspect and annotate the entity 
with annotation `@changelog` that will mark the elements whose changes are to be logged.

Given the following entity that represents a book on the domain level:

```cds
namespace model;

entity Books {
    key ID: UUID;
    title: String;
    stock: Integer;
}
```

And the corresponding service definition with the projection of the entity:

```cds
namespace srv;

using {model} from '../db/schema'; // Our domain model

service Bookshop {
    entity Books as projection on model.Book;
}
```

You need to include the change log model that is delivered to you from the feature like this:

```cds
using {sap.changelog as changelog} from 'com.sap.cds/change-tracking';
```

> Then, you have to **extend the domain entity** with the aspect `changelog.changeTracked` like this: 

Author: Technically, yes. Aspect can be anywhere, but it has to be on the first level where the entity wants to see its changes. Having it on the domain level just ensures that the application developer has a choice to move the change log annotations across the projections and not to worry that some changes will lose the references to the entities they belong to.

```cds
extend model.Books with changelog.changeTracked;
```

This aspect will include the association `changes` that will let you consume the change log both programmatically 
via CQN statements and in the UI. This implies that every projection 
of the entity `Books` will have this association and the changes will be visible in all of them. 

Your extended service definition should look like this:

```cds
namespace srv;

using {sap.changelog as changelog} from 'com.sap.cds/change-tracking';
using {model} from '../db/schema';

extend model.Books with changelog.changeTracked;

service Bookshop {
    entity Books as projection on model.Books;
}
```

Then, you need to annotate elements of the entity you want to track with the `@changelog` annotation:

```cds
annotate Bookshop.Books {
  title @changelog;
  stock @changelog;
};
```

:::warning

> Elements annotated with `@changelog` and which are subject to audit logging, i.e. annotated 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Elements annotated with `@changelog` and which are also subject to audit logging, i.e. annotated 
```

with `@PersonalData` are ignored by the change tracking feature. 
Personal data must be handled by the [Audit Logging](./auditlog) service.
:::

The level where you annotate your elements with the annotation `@changelog` is very important: if you annotate

> the elements on the domain level, that means that every change made through every projection of the entity will be tracked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the elements on the domain level every change made through every projection of the entity will be tracked.
```

> If you annotate the elements on the projection level, only the changes made through that projection is tracked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you annotate the elements on the projection level only the changes made through that projection is tracked.
```

:::warning
The values of the identifier are stored together with the change log as-is. They are not translated and some data types might 
not be formatted per user locale or some requirements e.g. different units of measurement or currencies. 
You should consider this when you decide what to include in the identifier.
:::

### Displaying changes in the UI

If you want to display the change log together with the overview of your entity, you need to add the facet
to the object page that will display the changes:

```cds
annotate Bookshop.Books with @(
  UI : { ...
    Facets : [ ...
       {
          $Type               : 'UI.ReferenceFacet',
          ID                  : 'ChangeHistoryFacet',
          Label               : '{i18n>ChangeHistory}',
          Target              : 'changes/@UI.PresentationVariant',
          ![@UI.PartOfPreview]: false
        } ...
   ] ...
  } ...);
```

If you want to have a common UI for all changes, you need to expose the change log as a projection and define
your own presentation for it as the changes are exposed only as part of the change tracked entity.

> ## Detection of changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Detection of Changes
```

Every modifying CQN-based operation requires additional READ events to retrieve the old state 
of the entity and the new state after the modifying operation.

> The images are compared and differences are stored within the change log. Nature of the change is determined by comparing the old and new 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The images are compared and differences are stored in the change log. The nature of the change is determined by comparing the old and new 
```

values of the entity: data that were not present in the old values are considered as added whereas data that are not present in 
the new values are considered as deleted. Elements that are present in both old and new values but have different values 
are considered as modified. This also works across compositions.

Each change detected by the change tracking feature is stored in the change log as a separate entry in the change log.

> ## How change logs are stored?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How are Change Logs Stored?
```

The namespace `sap.changelog` defines an entity `Changes` that reflects each change, so the changes are stored in a flat table for all entities together.

Each entry in the `Changes` entity contains the following information:

- A marker that represents the nature of the change: addition, modification or deletion.
- The qualified name of the entity that was changed and the qualified name of the root entity. They depend on the projection that was used to 
  change the entity and reflect the root and a target of the modifying operation. For flat entities, they are the same.
- The attribute of the target projection that was changed. 
- The new and old values as strings. 
- The user who made the change and the timestamp of the change.
- The data type of the changed attribute.
- The technical path from the root entity to the tracked target entity.

> ## Things to consider when using change tracking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Things to Consider when Using Change Tracking
```

---
synopsis: >
  Find here information about the change tracking feature in CAP Java.
status: released
---

# Change Tracking (beta)
<style scoped>
  h1:before {
    content: "Java"; display: block; font-size: 60%; margin: 0 0 .2em;
  }
</style>

As of CAP Java 2.7.0, the change tracking feature is available. You can use this feature to track the changes of your entities and display them in the UI.

### Enabling change tracking

To use the change tracking feature, you need to enable it in your `pom.xml` file. Add the following dependency to your project:

```xml
    <dependency>
	    <groupId>com.sap.cds</groupId>
		<artifactId>cds-feature-change-tracking</artifactId>
		<scope>runtime</scope>
    </dependency>
```

> You POM also must include the goal to resolve the CDS model delivered from the feature. See [Reference the New CDS Model in an Existing CAP Java Project](./plugins#reference-the-new-cds-model-in-an-existing-cap-java-project).

Author: This is a requirement, not a tip. How about adding a snippet to save people a click?

### Displaying changes in the UI

The change tracking feature does not impose any restrictions on how you display the change logs in the UI, but delivers
you the components that you can use to display the changes together with the main entity on an object page as one of the
possible ways of doing so.

If you want to display the change log together with the overview of your entity, you need to add the facet
to the object page that will display the changes:

```cds
annotate Bookshop.Books with @(
  UI : { ...
    Facets : [ ...
       {
          $Type               : 'UI.ReferenceFacet',
          ID                  : 'ChangeHistoryFacet',
          Label               : '{i18n>ChangeHistory}',
          Target              : 'changes/@UI.PresentationVariant',
          ![@UI.PartOfPreview]: false
        } ...
   ] ...
  } ...);
```

The definition of this facet is delivered from the change tracking feature and can be re-used for all entities.

If you want to have a common UI for all changes, you need to expose the change log as a projection and define
your own presentation for it as the changes are exposed only as part of the change tracked entity.

### What is change tracked?

> The change tracking feature tracks the changes of all modifying operations that are executed on the entity via CQN statements, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The feature tracks the changes of all modifying operations executed via CQN statements which are indirectly triggered by adapters or directly by custom code.
```

that includes the statements that you execute via custom code as well. It supports all kinds of modifying operations 
including the deep and the bulk updates. Changes made through native SQL, JDBC or other means that bypasses the CAP Java runtime are not tracked. 
Modifications that are forwarded to remote applications via Remote OData are not tracked as well.  

The level where you annotate your elements is very important: if you annotate the elements on the domain level,
that means that every change made through every projection of the entity will be tracked. If you annotate the elements

> on the projection level, only the changes made through that projection will be tracked.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
on the projection level, only the changes made through that projection is tracked.
```

> In case of the `Books` example above, the changes made through the `Books` projection will be tracked, but the changes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case of the `Books` example above, the changes made through the service entity `Bookshop.Books` are tracked, but the changes
```

> made on the domain entity will not be. That can be beneficial if you have a service that is used for data replication

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
made on the domain entity are omitted. That can be beneficial if you have a service that is used for data replication
```

or mass changes where change tracking can be very expensive operation, and you do not want to generate changes from such operations.

> When you decide how to annotate your elements, you should consider not only the structure of it but also the way it is changed

Reviewer 2: I don't understand the intention of this sentence

Author: What I wanted to say is that with change tracking it is important to know which projections are used to change the data. In custom code it is rather easy to mess with that (names can be very confusing).

in your applications including your custom code e.g. actions or functions. Otherwise, you might miss some changes or the change logs 
will be very hard to trace back to the origin of the change. 

### How change tracking feature identifies the changes?

> Every modifying operation that is executed via the CQN requires an additional reads to retrieve the old state 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every modifying CQN-based operation requires two additional READ to retrieve the old state 
```

of the entity and the new state after the modifying operation.

> Then they are compared and stored within the change log. Nature of the change is determined by comparing the old and new 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The images are compared and differences are stored within the change log. Nature of the change is determined by comparing the old and new 
```

> values of the entity: data that were not present in the old values are considered as added, data that are not present in 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
values of the entity: data that were not present in the old values are considered as added whereas data that are not present in 
```

the new values are considered as deleted. Elements that are present in both old and new values but have different values 
are considered as modified. This also works across compositions.

Each change detected by the change tracking feature is stored in the change log as a separate entry in the change log.

### How change logs are stored?

The namespace `sap.changelog` defines an entity `Changes` that reflects each change, so the changes are stored in a flat table for all entities together.

Each entry in the `Changes` entity contains the following information:

> - the marker that represents the nature of the change: addition, modification or deletion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A marker that represents the nature of the change: addition, modification or deletion.
```

- the qualified name of the entity that was changed and the qualified name of the root entity. They depend on the projection that was used to 
  change the entity and reflect the root and a target of the modifying operation. For flat entities, they are the same.
- the attribute of the target projection that was changed. 

> - the new and old values as a strings. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the new and old values as strings. 
```

- the user who made the change and the timestamp of the change.
- the data type of the changed attribute.

> - the path that contains the primary keys of the entity and names of the attributes from the root to the target.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the technical path from the root entity to the tracked target entity.
```

### Things to consider when using change tracking

- Consider the storage costs of the change log. The change log can grow very fast and can consume a lot of space 
  in case of frequent changes. You should consider the retention policy of the change log as it will not be deleted when you delete the entities. 
- Consider the performance impact. Change tracking needs to execute additional reads during updates to retrieve and compare updated values. 
  This can slow down the update operations and can be very expensive in case of updates that affect a lot of entities.
- Consider the ways your entities are changed. You might want to track the changes only on the projections that are used for 

>   the user interaction and not on the domain level or for data replication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  the user interaction and not on the domain level (for instance during data replication).
```

and the element. Otherwise, the change log will contain only the technical names of the entities and the elements. 
Titles will be translated, if they annotated as translatable. See [Externalizing Texts Bundles](../guides/i18n#localization-i18n) for more information.

## How Changes are stored?

The namespace `sap.changelog` defines an entity `Changes` that reflects each change, so the changes are stored in a flat table for all entities together.

Each entry in the `Changes` entity contains the following information:

- A marker that represents the nature of the change: addition, modification or deletion.
- The qualified name of the entity that was changed and the qualified name of the root entity. They depend on the projection that was used to
  change the entity and reflect the root and a target of the modifying operation. For flat entities, they are the same.
- The attribute of the target projection that was changed.
- The new and old values as strings.
- The user who made the change and the timestamp of the change.
- The data type of the changed attribute.
- The technical path from the root entity to the tracked target entity.

## Detection of Changes

> The change tracking works around the modifying CQL statements (`Insert`, `Upsert`, `Update`, and `Delete`) and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The change tracking intercepts the modifying CQL statements (`Insert`, `Upsert`, `Update`, and `Delete`) and 
```

requires additional READ events to retrieve the old and the new state of the entity.

> These two states are compared and differences are stored in the change log. The nature of the change is determined by comparing the old and new 

Author: Probably it is only me, but I do not like `image` in this context. Too technical or too confusing....
